Okay, I'm Ed Narsasian, I'm Director of the Helix Center.
Today's program is on living in the Anthropocene that was suggested to us by
Nirmi Shake, who is sitting there and I think she had conversations about it with
Don Moss and Akil Bylgrami.
Before I tell you something about the participants, we have two more programs
before the summer. On May 18 we have a program on SHAME and on June 8 we have a
program on status. I'm going to be super brief on the bios, the more extensive ones
are available on our website. Akil Bylgrami is the Sidney Morgan Besser
Professor of Philosophy at Columbia University. Amit of Gosh is the author of
the Great arrangement, climate change and the unthinkable and of course many
others. Dale Jamison is Professor of Environmental Studies and Philosophy at
New York University. W. John Kress is distinguished scientist and
character of botany at Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History. Donald
Moss is a psychoanalyst, program chair of the American Psychoanalytic
Association and founding member of the Green Gang. Nirmi Shake, co-host and
news producer of Democracy Now. She will take over as you know we don't do
moderating on these programs but she will get things going. Thank you.
Thanks very much Ed. So just so everyone knows what the format is, there's roughly
no format. We'll just begin talking and it'll be a kind of free conversation and
after we've spoken for a bit then we'll open it up to the audience for questions.
So I'd like to begin by asking John Kress who's an environmental scientist
to just lay out the scene. What is the anthropocene? When did it begin and you
know what are the most salient features of this period?
I recently published a book called Living in the Anthropocene. It's
appropriate to start with the scientific basis of where we're at in the year 2019
in terms of environmental change and this is not just climate change as
though we think of this as primarily a climate change and a global warming
issue. There's a lot of alter-authority planet that are going on right now that
make this broader than just pumping CO2 into the atmosphere. About 10,000
first I should say the earth 4.6 billion years old has been fluctuating in terms
of the climate, the temperature, the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere as well
as the as well as life on the planet. We started out with single-celled
organisms and now we're primarily dominated in terms of physical presence
and weight by multicellular animals, mammals, birds, plants. So there's this
dynamic aspect of the earth has been going on for a long time. But about 10,000
years ago, maybe 12,000, the end of the last major period of ice ages on the
planet, homo sapiens, humans were around at that point. And about 10,000, 12,000
years ago, suddenly the climate began to stabilize and we don't exactly know
what caused that stabilization but the the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere
stabilized, the temperature stabilized and that was the period when actually
humans began to develop our own civilization, our own cultures, agriculture
began domestication of animals, began. So it was this long period of stasis that
I attribute and maybe some of my colleagues attribute to how one species
on the planet, namely homo sapiens, humans, began or became the dominant
species controlling many of the aspects of how the planet functioned. That stability
of that climate, particularly the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere and the
temperature has now come to an end. All climate scientists agree that this
period of stability is now moving into a period of great fluctuation. CO2 is
increased in the atmosphere because primarily of the burning of fossil
fuels. That has led to an increase in temperature because of the greenhouse
effects, many of you I'm sure are aware, the rampant use and abuse of resources
around the planet, whether it's wood resources, whether it's fossil fuels,
whether it's fresh water, all of those abuses of natural resources has also
radically begin to change in the last few years. And as Nermene said, we're not
quite agreed upon when we reached a point where change was such that we
could maybe call this a new epic on of the planet, which used to be called the
Holocene. But most scientists agree now that it was about the mid-1950s where we
reached what was called the Great Acceleration when all of these aspects of
the environment reached a point where they all skyrocketed. So over that period
of time since the mid-50s, we've now reached a period in the age of the
planet where many of the aspects of stability are radically changing. And I
think that's what we want to address today. What does that period of change,
how is that going to affect, first of all, us as a species, but also how the rest
of the planet functions, whether it's biodiversity, whether it's cycling of
water, cycling of nitrogen, whatever, all those things are changing. And I think
probably a lot of you are here because you're as concerned as we are about
this period of rapid change. So I hope that's kind of what you wanted me to
address in terms of setting the stage of where we're at.
Amitabh, what about you've written this?
Very powerfully about the environment, about forests, about human beings in
relation to the earth. Today, if you pick up, you know, go into a bookshop with
South Asian literature. It's really all urban stuff. It's all, a lot of it is
political in the sense of being about politics or it's about identity. But
this other thing, this great reality that is outside us hardly seems to
impinge, you know, on people's sensibilities. And that is, I think to me,
it's the big question. I mean, you know, after all, Hurricane Sandy happened here
in New York. It has a larger concentration of writers than almost any other place.
But the curious thing is, can you think of the great Hurricane Sandy novel? There
are novels about New York, you know, drowning in the future. Many, several, but
there's not a single book about New York's actual drowning.
But also, as you say in the book, so I'm after this, I'm not going to ask any more
questions because I'm not supposed to. But in the book, you also point out that
when literature explicitly deals with these issues, it's almost always
relegated to the realm of science fiction. Yes, absolutely. You know, you look at
all the big reviews and so on. I mean, it's quite rare to see, you know, novels
that deal with these issues ever being regarded as literary fiction. So, you
know, we subscribe to a notion of boja seriousness, which by definition excludes
these unlikely things, except that they're not so unlikely anymore. But I must say
that in 2018, there was one book which I feel made a huge difference. And that's
Richard Powers' book, Overstory, which was actually on the shortlist for the
Man Booker Prize. And I think in, I mean, you know, it's, I can't go into all of it
right now, but I think this book is a very significant event in literary history,
really. I mean, all of you, really. It's a very interesting thing that even
progressive and left-leaning writers, thinkers, pretty much till 20 years ago,
at most, never really thought very much about nature, but never thought about
future generations. Novelist Bonnie Natsom called Love in the Anthropocene. And
we run various public radio shows and so on. And I come from the world of
philosophy and environmental science, not the world of literature, although writing
fiction was fun. And I remember this phrase, idea fiction being used in a
derogatory way. Not, I mean, it wasn't that this is
didactic. No, it was just the very idea that the fiction somehow carried an idea
already seemed to be a strike against it. I think that's, I mean, so there's
something there, I think, in the world of literature. I mean, the other thing is
it's extremely difficult, I think, to write about the Anthropocene, especially
when we understand it in the way that the explanation was given. I mean, we're
really talking about the disruption of all these cycles, not just the carbon
cycle. And all this is happening at the same time that technology is
increasing radically, the globalization is speeding up incredibly. And when we
tend to focus on one thing, I mean, I want to tell you about a climate change
world. I want to tell you about a technologically advanced world. We tend to
focus on that thing and then tell the story as sort of as if everything else
gets held constant in this thing changes. But that's not the future. That's not
next week. That's not next month. It's a matter of...
And what was it about? It was about the destruction of the sacred cedar forest
by Gilgamesh and Incadou. So the earliest literature we've ever had was a
about power, but was also about the relationship between man, our humans, and
nature, and about the destruction of nature. So that history of literature
goes way back and what's happened in the last 30 years is one perspective, but
what's happened in the last 5,000 years is different. But it's also that, you know,
much like writing about war is not about all wars or the conditions that give
rise globally to wars, but rather a particular war as a backdrop. So similarly
with the Anthropocene, I would imagine that any kind of literary writing would
take one what's come to be known as an extreme weather event or and situate the
story within that context, at least that's the way that I understand it. But
Don, you gave a very interesting paper in Iceland, which I had the pleasure to
hear on slow violence and the slow violence of climate change or climate
catastrophe as you made the argument in fact that it should not be just called
change because that's two benign a word. So why don't you say a little about that?
Before saying anything about that, I wanted to say something about what
psychoanalysts have been working on for not quite entirely. Well, yes, for 120 years or so.
And I think that one of the things one would conclude from looking at psychoanalytic
literature is that there's a deep lack of interest in the future. That is the
entire the entire discipline is organized. Freud had the famous phrase that
neurotic people suffer from reminiscences and in saying so, the notion would be
that people like us who are interested in neurotic people would be focusing on
the pathogenic consequences of reminiscences and essentially be thinking
of people. The labor of becoming a person would essentially be the labor of
liberating the work completed. And I think that it seems to me, I just want to say
one other thing about that, sort of about that. I was John and I were coming up here
together and I was maybe many of us, we watched these discovery channel things
and we watched threatened mammals and see how they do and what they're doing. And I
was watching one recently and I saw all these threatened mammals and what they
do is do their best to adapt to the threat. So if there isn't sufficient ice,
they try to make do with the ice that they find. If there isn't sufficient ice
in spot A, they try to move to spot B. If it's too cold here or too warm here,
they move up the mountain. But the task is an immediate one. Now you don't have a
sense that any of these animals and I think it would include a huge percentage
of humans that our task always feels either immediate to escape the immediate
threat or to escape the regressive pull of the past. And so few of us and maybe
none of our, whatever we call them, primates and earlier in the chart, have
any notion of the future at all. The one thing I would add about progressive
literature, it seems to me marks is an exception that at least the marks that I
loved was always written with the future in mind. That is the whole notion was
future-oriented. That the entire notion of what the human task would be.
Hegel interpreted the world our task needs to change it. So it's, so there
you have this contribution that was future-oriented and in that sense,
just that. Okay. Jack, can I ask you, I mean I've spoke about the lack of
consciousness and literary writing about these issues and done trying to
diagnose psychoanalysis. But isn't it also true that geology, until it became
geosciences, was also very focused on the lithosphere. I mean they were
focused on a sanitary. Focused on what? The lithosphere, the solid rock or
the rock below the surface or sedimentary phenomena. But it wasn't focused on the
hydrosphere or the atmosphere or the biosphere. And all that's now become
part of an understanding of what these sciences should be doing. But I
assume it's because of this very narrow focus that they didn't look at the data
correctly or something. Well, I think that's what they had to look at. They had
fossils and they had the hard part of the planet to actually study. But now that
we're also interesting in how the atmosphere and how the hydrosphere and
the biosphere is changing. I think scientists, not just geologists, but
environmental scientists such as myself, are trying to go back and look and use
data that we can find to look at these other parts of the sphere. So ice cores
and such where we can actually interpret what went on in the atmosphere
5,000, 10,000, 50,000 years ago. So it's very interesting you bring up, I mean I
think of paleontologists when you talk about geologists. And all my
paleontologists at the Smithsonian, my paleontologist colleagues, who are always
looking back, Don, as you say, they all, when I bring up the Anthropocene, they
all say, don't worry. John, relax. Don't worry, the Earth is 4.6 billion years
old. Life has been around for 3.2 billion. If you're worried about the future of
life, don't. Because life will go on where one species, things will radically
change. If you're worried about your grandchildren, you should do, you should
be really worried. Or you're worried about your great-grandchildren. So I think that
you logic- Sorry, I don't understand. That means you should worry about the
species or you shouldn't or you should worry about the long term. You should only
worry about it immediately. Right. I see. But it's our the future generations of
humans that are going to suffer the most. It's not in life on the planet. Even
though we are now responsible for a thousand times greater rate of extinction
than happened 200 years ago. But I'm curious about it. When before the last
time scale being so huge, do you just see the short-term trends as noise and
dismiss them? What was the- No, it wasn't dismissed at all. I think it was made more
relevant by what's happening on the planet today. So suddenly that was
academic understanding of changes in atmosphere and hydrosphere. Now with the
changes that are happening in the world today, that data collected in the past.
That's what I mean. So earlier, did they dismiss what would we now see a
short-term trends in- Oh, no, they didn't know about it. They just didn't-
They weren't that good. I mean, so there's two different issues. I want to go back and
pick up on something in adaptation. But on this issue, I mean, there's really
interesting issues in epistemology and the history of science here. So I mean,
so if you take someone like Araneus, for example, in 1903, I mean, essentially
those calculations that he made on long, cold, boring, Swedish nights in the
back of an envelope have basically turned out more or less to be right, although
we have a very different understanding of the mechanisms that actually make
that change possible. I mean, I think there's two things in response to your
question that Kila should be noted. And maybe in some ways they're kind of boring.
I don't know, but one thing had to do with the development of supercomputers.
Do I talk- The development of supercomputers, which allow you to do all kinds of things
in terms of simulating futures that could simply not been done before. I mean, I
was around the National Center for Atmospheric Research, for example, the
first time that people were able to link ocean models with atmosphere models,
for example. That sounds like an obvious thing to do, but it's something you
actually could not do until the early 1980s when you had the computing power
to do it. At the same time, I think you're also wanted to kind of
associate logical fact, which is the kind of science that we grew up on was a
kind of science that without stating this explicitly sort of assumed that
nature seeks equilibria. And that divergence from equilibrium states are
some way driven by something sort of weird and exogenous to the system.
The kind of early biology, for example, that sort of talks about climax
ecosystems and so on is of that mode. We're now in an era where we tend to see
disequilibrium and chaos, if you will, as more than natural state of things. Now,
that isn't a purely scientific discovery. That has something to do with the
changes in political and social climate and the kind of cultural settings in
terms of how we look at the data. So it's epistemological, but yeah, driven by
these things. And I was just wondering to what extent, just looking at the
timescale in very large terms, just makes us dismiss these things as always.
But it's interesting, the equilibrium, that's a sort of theoretical
pre-commitment which would drive onto it too. Yeah. If I can just say one thing
in response to your comment about kind of how science has changed over the last
30 years, when I was a graduate student studying tropical ecology, my job was to
go out and find a pristine habitat in nature and study the biology, study the
interactions between the organisms and try to find out how nature works. That is
no longer the paradigm anymore. The paradigm is to go out and find out how
humans are affecting those systems. It's totally changed. You can't find a
single graduate student in environmental sciences that is going out to look at a
pristine system because they do not exist anymore. I wonder whether there are
any, like if you think about the Anthropocene as a kind of, I mean it's a
silly word to use, but let's say pathology. A catastrophic change
in what had been a stable form of life, let's say. And then there's this pathogenic
series of events that we're talking about. So are there any in medicine, in any
zone, in all the humanities, or is there any zone in which contemporary
pathologies are being addressed in a serious way with the future in mind? Or
is all serious address of pathologies organized around eliminating the pathology
at which point the aim would be accomplished? Are there pathologies
being addressed with a serious focus on generations to come? I think what
the nomenclature of Anthropocene is intended to capture better be much more
open-ended and not thought of in these terms. Anyway, something to get other
people to. What do you mean by open-ended? It isn't as if there is
some telos, which you know some messianic end. It's something uncertainty.
Yeah, uncertainty and therefore keeping a very wide range of options
open as to what might be done about it or both by way of constraint. And
actually a preparedness to be reactionary to say let's just go back. The future
might be a better outcomes in the future if we are against modernity or
against even that should be a possible option. So that's what I mean by
wilding, the notion of wilding would be something more conservative and not
radical in the sense of thinking we can change anything that I will, etc.
But isn't going back, isn't that changed? No, it is changed but it's not the kind
of thing that Hegel Marx and other figures brought in the future in the
way that you had noticed. I mean we tend to have these two orientations towards
the future. One is utopianism, which is largely disastrous in terms of human
history in my opinion. And the other is muddling through. And the amazing thing,
which is what we actually do most of the time, and the amazing thing about
muddling through is not that it actually works. It's that it seems to work and it
seems to work in part because of this incredible power of adaptation that
humans have, both to adapt to changing circumstances, but also to adapt their
preferences and desires about things. And so when people talk about the
Anthropocene and how terrible at the 21st century is going to be and so on and
so forth, it's a very delicate thing to talk about because there's lots of things
I want people to do in response to this. But look back at the 20th century.
Unbelievable disaster. Millions and millions and millions of people killed.
Fast parts of the planet destroyed and despoiled. A decade after Rome was in
rubble and people were eating cats, it was La Dolce Vita. I mean with very
little sense of how close people were to those events. And I think one mistake that
we make about thinking about the future is when we imagine the world in 2020,
when things are really getting going, 2030 or 2040, we imagine ourselves into
that future with the baselines from where we come and the preferences we have and
the desires we have. But the people are going to be born into that world,
are not going to mourn the same things that we would mourn, where we to be
born into that world. And that makes it even more difficult I think to think
about the future from where we are now on these long time scales.
Well, Camita actually, one of the things in your book which was very striking is
you cite the example of Gandhi, of course, who was one of the early figures, a
prominent figures to understand that modernity in its present form, and one
can only say that it's accelerated since then, to recognize that the form of life
that that was giving rise to would simply not be possible.
It was taking us to disaster, the jobtists knew it, the lotites knew it.
You know, around the world wherever this thing went, people tried to resist. I mean,
just today I was reading about how in the 19th century the Bonaparte state was
trying to impose certain forestry regulations on Italy and how strongly
the Alpine peasants resisted because actually they held land in common.
You know, there was no tragedy of the commons, they held land in common and
they regulated it. You know, so I think we forget sometimes how new this this
regime of property is. We also forget that, you know, before the 18th century,
really people everywhere around the world understood, you know, that there are
certain limits, you have to act in certain ways, you have to act with the
future as they did in Japan during the 17th century. So, none of those things is
really... But a view to the future in this sense of shrinking resources and the
possibly injurious effects of consumption, acquisition, this was the, I mean, of the
examples that you're citing, it was just a more community oriented. It was that,
but it was also that people recognized. So, I'm certainly with the key. I think at
this point, you know, I think we have to understand really, is that this
disaster has been brought upon us by essentially the 19th and 20th century,
what we call education, what we call rationality. And I would say that in this
psychoanalysis plays a very large part. You know, I say this is someone who, you
know, loved to read Freud, but you can see in retrospect that in a way it's a
part of a whole constellation of things that is brought us, you know, to this
disaster. And really the task ahead of us is to try and unlearn. Just today, I was
reading such an interesting book. It's on art and the Anthropocene, you know. So,
in the Little Ice Age, as it was advancing, you know, the last great sort of atmospheric
fluctuation was in the 17th century. So, in India, for example, the Emperor Akbar,
very early on, he responds to this in an artistic sense, you know, the droughts and
the terrible atmospheric disturbances, the commission, you know, a lot of art
around this, but also the commission, you know, all sorts of waterworks, all kinds.
So, it entered their minds in a way that this doesn't enter our mind now. And why is
that? It's because we've been educated.
Like analysis. So, those four words put in a cluster. I think what you're getting
at is the kind of emergence of what could be called, what do we say, a kind of fetishized
individual. And that the educated individual is a fetishized individual, is a fetishized
individual and a fetishizing individual, that is, who turns his or her individuality into
a magical talisman which represents success and returns other individuals into talisman
also. So, I think you hold psychoanalysts, at least in part, responsible for that. Well,
I mean, you said, I'm not just inferring that. You just said it. And I agree with you. It's
hard to say responsible because I think it's actually hard to locate responsibility anywhere
when you think about a historical trend, modernity. Well, can one name the responsible agents
for modernity? It wouldn't be easy to do. And nor would it be easy to hold one responsible
for wanting to become a modern person. It's hard to locate responsibility in there. True.
It's hard to attribute it to that form of agency. But one could make helpful diagnostic
attempts by noticing. So, if you take some of the concepts that they'll and Amitav that
surfaced in things they said. So, if you take the tragedy of the commons, the tragedy is
supposed to arise because commoners are supposed to ask, since in which this notion of rationality,
whether it's for a common or natural or agricultural common. So, these things are, I don't know
what agents, but they're out-lucks. They're what emerged in pretty much since the mid-17th
century. I'd like to just say something there. I think we have to remember that this guy
Gareth Hardin, who came up with a paper on the tragedy of the commons, he was a white
supremacist. He was a eugenicist, a fascist really. And his idea of the commons comes
from exactly what you're saying, which is this idea that people who think of themselves
as maximizing individuals, if allowed upon the commons, will destroy the commons.
There is in North America and Europe right now. Yeah, that's the thing. It's North America.
I mean, it's essentially that kind of, you know, this corner-coopier idea that you have
once English settlers come to America, that the land will always provide, you know, and
each one for himself. And it also, I mean, that also raises the question of agency, right,
when we speak of these, like, can you fault someone for wanting to be a modern individual?
The question could also be asked, does one leave people with a choice to be anything
but a modern individual? It's not as though, I mean, now you see it in all of these movements,
indigenous peoples in Latin America, peasants in large parts of South Asia. They are being
forced by various systems. I mean, capitalism, obviously, one of the most egregious, to
adopt, adapt, and adopt ways of life because simply the way of life that they've had is
no longer tenable. And it's no longer tenable because of these larger system structures
that are propelling them outside a form where, for them, there is no other outside.
I think that's absolutely right. I mean, but you know, I don't think there's any response
that one can make once one acknowledges what you're quite rightly pointing out, except
to say that even very well we are shaped by the structures that you describe. We go in
and out of being cooperative and non-corporate. You know, in some frames of thinking, it
will dream of us to ask, what if I cooperated and others didn't and not going to cooperate.
There are many, many contexts, quotidian contexts, you know, where one is completely, the question
never occurs to one, to ask that deeply alienated question, you know, which you're saying is
shaped by structures of modern society. And yet in many public contexts, that's precisely
how we think, you know, in this way of modern rationality and so on. So really, I think
it's a very important task of politics to try and see how we can scale up the context
in which we are not, you know, not driven by those ideals of rationality, scale them
up so that we, they yield the conceptual resource for us to criticize the other frame in which
we think, you know, I mean, that's, that should be a very central goal of politics.
So, I keep having things I want to ask, because then we keep moving on and I forget what I
was doing. They were just throughout a couple of things. One is, climate change is a problem
that exists today. And it wasn't a subject that people talked about 50 years ago. They
didn't talk about, like you said, when I was at university, we didn't worry about climate
change. So that since it has now become a problem, we can look back and say, well, we
did all these things wrong. There we are today. Now we didn't do it completely right, but
we didn't know how to do it completely right. So that's why we are here and we should try
to fix it. The other thing that was, that occurred to me is that in a way, you know,
Freud came up and criticism of Freud came up. But the fact is, when religion dominated
everything, then you assumed that God would take care of everything. There wasn't this
idea that we are so powerful that we are going to fix things that God isn't going to take
care of. We just have to be good, go to confession, and eventually things will work out. So it's
more of a concern, become more of a concern now where there's a diminution of religion.
There's less effect of God on everybody's thinking. And so it's become a major concern.
It's a devastating effect on people's lives. Those are just random thoughts that I was
thinking as you were talking. So just two things. One is without really disagreeing with the
historical story, we shouldn't lose sight of the fact that, for example, climate change
was mentioned by President Johnson in a message to Congress in 1965. There has really been
something like a concerted attempt to obscure the continuous history of the knowledge of
this. There are two books are reviewed in the New York Times for the weekend where they
say that it was already in Congress in the 70s. It absolutely was. So that's a whole
other issue. What's tended to happen is that about every 10 years people wake up and look
around and say, what's this climate change stuff? Nobody ever told me about this and then
become synonymous again, until the next up surge. I want to go back to this agency issue
because I really think that this is key. It's not just indigenous peoples who view themselves
as being involved in coercive systems. It's also people who live in the suburbs who want
to take their kids to school and would like not to burn gasoline but don't feel that there's
any other way of doing this. One of the things that I think is really central to the meaning
of the Anthropocene is that the coercive structures that humanity used to feel imposed
on itself by nature are now imposed on us by our social political and economic systems.
If anything, this vise of coercion feels to people, I think, across nations and societies,
as rigid, perhaps even more rigid and inescapable as the vise of nature once felt to people.
So would you say that the word coercion, it's interesting, but the word coercion, in order
to feel coerced, you have to be imagining non-coercion. You have to have an image, a
realistic image of something that feels real to you. Oh, it could be otherwise. We would
need that in order to feel coerced today. But if the source of coercion is nature, are
people imagining an alternative nature such that, see, I'm just trying to distinguish
between coercion and necessity. So a nature might induce necessity, at least as I would
think, whereas capital induces coercion. I suppose it depends on how you experience
this from nature. So if you experience this through a god, for example, and particularly
a wrathful and arbitrary god, maybe that stands somewhere between the necessity of nature
and the coercion, something that looks like capital, I don't know. And I'm not so invested
in the comparison anyway. What I think is really important is, again, this kind of weird
paradox, where it's humanity who's remaking the planet. It's not nature in the non-human
sense. It's not aliens from somewhere else. It's us that are doing it. But yet there
is this sense of power. I think of it as not necessarily coercion, but constraints and
restraints. Earlier, nature wasn't a constraint because when Europeans landed in North America,
it was an endless garden, even though there were a lot of other people here already taking
care of that garden. So nature seemed to not constrain us. We've reached a point where
we realize that resources are finite now for our population use. And we could argue when
those finite resources will run out or when they won't run out. But we realize that the
planet is a certain size. And we also realize that there's more of us on the planet using
those resources. And so I think we're beginning to feel that constraint being ourselves rather
than nature before. The fault line was earlier when we actually began to equate nature with
natural resources. It's true what you say that resources will run out, but that's still
a very anthropocentric way of seeing the problem. It does seem to me that we at some point
transformed the concept of nature into the concept of natural resources. And that transformation
was a fault line in landing us in the mid-end that we are in.
For sure. It turns nature into quantity. You know, as it's, you see, this goes back
to what Ed was asking, which is if you desacralize nature at some point, nature first got equated
with, without remainder, exhaustively equated with the idea of what the natural sciences
study. It's a nature containing no properties that the natural sciences don't study or can't
study. Now, I think that's a superstition of modernity.
Yes. It's, you know, many people who I know and admire who have great concern for climate
change, like my friend Peter Singer, your friend too. That's how he would see nature
as that which the natural sciences study and try and recover such environmental anxieties
that he has and develop them within that assumption. But I think the assumption is wrong.
As a natural scientist, I believe that nature exists outside what natural scientists can
study. There will be nature on the planet long after natural scientists are gone. And
that's true. That's a slightly different point. And I think that's perfectly correct. But
what I'm suggesting is that some kind of baby was thrown away with the mouth water, which
is that value properties got equated as well from nature. And I'm saying, there's, you
can be an atheist and insist that nature contains value properties which should constrain our
behavior towards nature. And I'm saying that a lot of scientists not doing science, but
doing philosophy in their own time have equated nature with what the natural sciences study.
So when Dawkins says things like that, he's not talking as a scientist. He's talking
about as a public intellectual philosopher. And as Wittgenstein said, you know, only
a year for philosophy could say something as absurd as that.
No, I have one thing to talk about what you're saying, having to do with something I think
is quite potentially useful about psychoanalysts in this regard. And it's a Melanie Klein notion
of different set of resources. And let's say that the infant is in that sense a natural
scientist in relation to its mother so conceived. And then comes this fateful moment, so says
Klein, in which the nature of the position is changed. And the nature of the change is
toward a depressive position with the implication of a kind of melancholy acceptance of the
mother's limitation of the limitation in her resource capacity. But at the same time,
a huge expansion of her status as something other than resource. So losing her as a source
of unlimited resource, that's the cost. The gain is a vision of her as an entity that
needs protection, no less than I do. And in that sense, there's something, how can I
say, there's something theorized in psychoanalysis that I think is kind of congruent with what
you're saying. You see what I mean? But it's obviously not the aspects of psychoanalysis
that I'm talking about. No, no, no. Can I ask the two of you to talk a little bit about
that if you start about the... I mean, some rude remarks about psychoanalysis.
No, I mean, I was just following... I mean, as you said... We were both saying this.
Yeah, I mean, it's individualizes. There comes to be reliance upon individual histories,
upon the past. But you know, I think the important thing that we can't forget here was two things.
I must say, for me now, I find Jung's thinking much more interesting in relation to the Anthropocene.
The other thing is that I think we can't forget here that really, you know, one of the major
scientists writing the IPCC said the other day, you know, that climate change is not
a natural phenomenon. It's actually the ongoing effect of inequality. And especially those
of us who are from India or China or Indonesia or wherever, you know, this is the thing.
I mean, the solving or the addressing of climate change is no longer in Western hands. It's
really going to be decided in Asia because Asia has the weight of numbers. And the reason
why nobody can go to an Asian population and say, cut back your emissions is because they
say, well, we just want what they have. You know, it's just that. I mean, that's really
the fundamental dynamic that drives it.
But I think that, isn't it a way out of this exceptional science?
Well, I'd just like to follow up on your point. We haven't really talked about economic systems
yet and the impact of economic systems on climate change. And some of you may know, there's
ecological economics now, which is beginning to rise as an alternative to capitalistic
economics and neoliberalism and such things. It seems to me, my reading of the literature,
which is that economics is not immune to natural laws, is not immune to science, is
not immune to social interactions, but really depends on that in a way. And we have to change
our system and recycle analysis does have to.
But what I've heard about future of an illusion and civilization and this just contains where
he addressed that. But he addressed that in a very scientific way. Yes, exactly. He just
thought of these as counter drives to the drives of the age.
Yes.
So we should open up the first question. Thank you all. It was a very interesting talk.
My question will be for all of you, anybody who'd like to answer it. I'm going to make
a couple quick generalizations so I can formulate it into a question. So the idea of the tragedy
of the commons was that if everybody was selfish and acted individually, it would be a tragedy.
And on the other side of the argument, Ellen, and Ostrom got a Nobel Prize by saying, people
don't do that in ordinary life. They act as communities and they see holistically and
they work it out. Who's the owner of Australia?
Okay. So there's these two alternative possibilities. Now, again, to oversimplify, if I can ask
the question, when civilizations are characterized, it's simplified by saying all civilizations
have put the community before the individual. Western civilization is the first civilization
where the individual was put on a pedestal before the community and despair.
They don't interest.
You don't sound close.
I just want to add.
When I really depressed, you wouldn't be here, right?
I want to add as a sort of maybe a Carla or your question that I haven't heard today
here among the panelists any sort of solutions that don't seem to touch on some form of coercion
of some type that either through guilt, through a sense of guilt or through regulation, there's
two different things.
Maybe it's absolutely mis, or it's just not sufficient.
So this isn't an answer to your question. I'll leave other people to confess how they've
managed their inner lives. But there's two things that always really strike me about
this question, which I get a lot.
The first is, I'm doomed. We're all going to die as individuals. I mean, whatever people
figure out or don't figure out about life in the 23rd century, and I think there's
something for cycle analysts here about why it is we're so concerned about collective
doom and somehow so much in denial on an everyday basis about the probability of one
about my individual doom.
So that's just the...
I think you said it's being about a van to the room.
Well, I mean, that's just one question. The other thing is that when it comes to these
civilizations that we've built and what threatens the most, as someone who's worked on climate
change for decades, I can tell you, at least with complete confidence in my part, that
it's nuclear weapons. That it's nuclear weapons that will really put an end to anything like
the civilizations that we all know in treasure.
Climate change may do that. It certainly will cause enormous amounts of death and suffering.
If humanity survives in a recognizable form, it's not going to be very recognizable to
us, but nuclear weapons. This is certain destruction and the probability of this happening is
very great on relatively short time horizons.
So I just find it kind of puzzling, the kind of freak out, the level of people's freak
out about climate change compared to our complacency about nuclear weapons and our denial about
this death that awaits me in the not too distant future.
If I could kind of respond to that, I think those are just two examples of the possibilities.
You brought up geoengineering. That's in response to climate change, but that's another attempt
by homo sapiens to control things. I think we will see many more of those if we continue
on. As a naturalist, you know, I don't really care about humans to tell you the truth. I
care about the 10 million species on the planet that are being disproportionately affected
by what one species does. There's no other species on the planet that makes other species
go extinct. There's one and they're all sitting in this room.
Not all of them.
Can I ask your question? Somebody sent me an article recently on the disappearing insect
species. Apart from pollution, the other major cause is apparently agriculture.
Now, can I just ask, you know, on the one hand in the last seven decades, this increasing
organization and fear and fear people are actually living off agriculture, making their
living off agriculture, even in a country like India, which was 80%, is now 49% agriculture.
And it's just where everything is headed. So I'm sort of not getting it. Is it some
notion of agriculture? What? Are the inputs so much more productive that it's not?
That's two things. There is not less agriculture now. There is more efficient agriculture.
Through mechanization, such as the dam tractor, which has really changed things, so fewer
people were needed to do the same productivity.
Yes, and the second is the green revolution, which required a lot more fossil fuels and
a lot more pesticides. And it says pesticides that are in monocultures.
Well, monocultures, which is a result of that, which require more. So there's more of us.
So there has to be actually more agriculture to be feeding us.
People are being dispossessed to their land. You know, they're sort of being pushed into
destitution. And yet agriculture is being intensified in these ways through these more
efficient inputs to give rise to. I mean, it just seems like...
It's obscene. But John, you obviously know, but it's also they say, I mean, meat, the
consumption of meat all over the world, the agricultural land is now being used more and
more for the part of the Amazon that now is devoted to growing soybeans is for feeding
the cattle, not for feeding.
I think we have another question.
I mean, can I just take one comment about meat consumption? Because this is hugely important
because we talk about developing world and they want to be like us and all this. But
the real time bomb is increasing meat consumption in poor countries. And interestingly, India
has some values to dampen that down. And the Chinese government is actually has a policy
in place to try to reduce meat consumption rather than have it grow. And I think these
are things that are not well-unappreciated in the West.
Can I just say something in response? Who's the gentleman? You asked the question, right?
Sorry, we don't mean to disregard it. I understand that the point, the question you have about
teaching and, you know, the questions that you get from some of your... I work at Democracy
Now. It's an independent television news show here in New York. And after our broadcast,
often we have groups of students who come to watch the live broadcast and then we go
and we speak to them. And of course, as young people, they all want to know. And obviously,
democracy now, people have said, you know, you should rename it, depress me now. The
news is just relentlessly awful. So, you know, after you watch an hour of democracy
now, obviously you just think, okay, which cliff can I go throw myself off of? But, you
know, I think that... There are a couple of things. I mean, one I think that... I mean,
I don't know how much of a solace it is, is the space is not between hope and despair,
right? I mean, the option is not between hope and despair. I mean, I think being, you know,
the way that... Forgive me for saying this, but in the US in particular, there's a massive
emphasis on optimism and, you know, feeling good and I'm great and terrific and this kind
of thing. I mean, this is just a... It's an... at a very shallow level which has very little
meaning or duration. So, that's not... I mean, I don't think that's the alternative to despair.
I think, you know, also in light of what, you know, people here have been talking about
is the question of solidarity, right? Solidarity in the sense of feeling mutually both implicated,
bound and responsible. Now, whether that induces more despair or more hope, I don't know, but
it subverts or... I don't know, somehow looks at the problem of individual despair through
a different lens.
Thank you. I love that. Could I respond to that too? Sorry. At the Smithsonian, we've been
struggling with this for a long time because we don't, as a public museum or a series of museums,
hate the idea of telling the public that we're pessimistic. I mean, it's just not a way the best
way to engage. So, we have started something called Earth Optimism Day where it's more the
solidarity, exactly what you're saying. It's to present cases where we have succeeded in changing
things. But at the same time, point out all the issues that one has to realistically understand
to achieve those optimistic successes. So, there's a way to do it. I have a hard time doing that
because I'm a little on the pessimistic side. But I think we are getting towards that a little bit.
I think the time is reported that a substantial majority of Americans in a survey said they were
prepared to pay 15% more for energy bills and have the money spent on clean energy programs.
So, that's a sign of what we do. I mean, some times, I'll talk to you. I just have to say that
these surveys go back decades. And the problem is people are always willing to pay more if the
money goes for some shiny new thing. The real reason to make people pay more for energy is so
little function is a pregovian tax and get them to consume less. That is what's unacceptable.
This is what they always say. I could pay more, but not so much more that they have to use less
of it. Oh, no, not that. But that's the whole point of the tax, London. We'll see this with
congestion pricing. This is another place. I would just add that neither hope nor despair is a strategy.
You know, leadership and action is what we need. But to my question, you know, this is not the
first time in our history that we've faced a crisis like this, you know, perhaps not this grand.
But ultimately, it boils down to a political crisis. And more often than not in history,
the scapegoating has been used rather than trying to find a solution to the crisis.
And, you know, the 20th century is replete with that. And now we find, you know, that climate
changes Chinese hoax. He hasn't said that in a long time, but he probably will if he needs to.
But does anyone have, I mean, now that we've discussed the problem, does anybody have any
suggestions for political action that we could take as individuals or collectively?
Ben Shapiro, the right-wing idea, wrote here recently that the way to solve the crime of crisis
is to bomb India and China's coal-fired power plants. And, you know, it's a curious thing. I
think if we were in a different world, that would be the political response.
The first thing is, I mean, I think there's so much about the way we misconceived this issue.
And one is climate change is not a problem. Climate change is out of the box that essentially all
of these Anthropocene forces, which are fundamentally about destabilizations of natural systems,
are simply going to condition and affect life on the planet for the next few centuries,
unless we do something even crazier like geoengineering, for example, right?
So those destabilizations of natural systems throw up and produce a wide range of real problems,
like sea level rise, for example, droughts, extreme events that people are going to have to respond to.
But there's not a solution to climate change now. There was at a time, there could have been an
energy transition at a time before we got committed to 1.8 degrees centigrade, and probably are going
to go to three or four or five before this thing turns around. So the way we have to think about
this issue is no longer in the problem solution space. When it comes to the obvious things,
sure, we have to get the idiots out of office, you know? But it's not, you know, but look,
we're living in it. Who was it? Madison or somebody once said a long time ago that the
win of the framers, that the fundamental weakness of the American political system is that the
people cannot be impeached. And that's essentially what we're dealing with.
I guess. That can't be right. It's so typical of us intellectuals when something happens to
blame the people rather than in the institutions. And you know, Jameson, Fred Jameson said,
it's easier to imagine the end of the world than it is to imagine the end of capitalism.
And I don't know if there's any solution. Whatever solution there is to climate change problem,
it probably involves such constraints in capitalism that it brings about a terminus of capitalism.
And then Jameson's thought is, we just don't have the conceptual wherewithal
in our political zeitgeist to even so much as. Absolutely. But we do have to take,
look, this was a throwaway line about impeaching the populace. But we do have to take seriously
that there is no system of governance that has ever been created by humanity.
You can't believe in democracy and despise the electorate. You can't do it.
I'm not on board with that.
Well, if I were to complete my sentence, what I would have said, there is no system of governance
that's been created, that there's including democracy, whatever that is exactly, and wherever one might
find it being practiced, which is certainly nowhere where I live, for example. But wherever that may be,
there's no reason to believe that any of these systems of governance that this species has developed
are adequate to the challenges that we face. Now, I don't say that in celebration or to dance on
the grave of liberalism or anything like that, it's just to talk about the seriousness of the
issues that we face and our lack of experience as a species in dealing with things of the scale.
Singapore, the Netherlands are very responding very, very quickly and with general sort of social
consensus. And that's interesting because there are two such different political systems.
And some very small scale. One last question? So I don't quite know where to start, but first I
wanted to say something about, we're all involved in political economies, and I just wanted to point
out that I'm the fifth guy coming to ask questions in a panel that's mostly guys, and I'm sort of
curious about that reality. So if a woman would like to speak now, I'm willing to step down.
First. Okay. I'll have two more questions.
I was saying to strange twitching in my breasts when somebody mentioned that women were the
feeders, and I want a clarification on that point from you guys.
Well, that was you. Yes.
Yes.
But it was about me.
Nice. That's...
I didn't say that.
No, it was in response to what Akhil was saying about nature, and the notion that nature could
be reduced to a notion of resource. And what I was saying is that in Melanie Klein's theory of
infant development, that we start off in relation to mothers whom we experience as resources,
and whom we experience as resources without limit. And this momentous...
momentously, this mode of experience undergoes a transformation at which point this once limitless
resource becomes limited and is recognized as something more and other than a resource.
And that transformation of it into her seems to me, and seems now to me, to be congruent with
what Akhil was saying about a transformation that went in the other direction, from her to it,
from nature as something like a living being, something like her, beyond the reach of the study
of her resources, and that vision of nature, or not vision, but I don't know what to say,
a sense of nature might have been lost when changed into that which natural science can study,
and that which we can, from which we can extract. That's how that came up.
Yeah, thanks for the clarification. And in fact, nature is often referred to as a woman because of
the unpredictability of it, hurricanes, which are now hurricanes or whatever. We're now having
masculine names for that. And I think it is time. I'm so proud. I'm watching my sister here
feeling a sense of comfort and I do encourage more women to be here and participating,
schlep over, go on the subway, deal with it, and just be here. I'm talking to the people in outer
space who are watching us. Thank you. You know, I do have to say, one interesting thing about what
you're saying is that, you know, having sort of imbibably off the climate change discourse,
it is very striking that it's an overwhelmingly Eurocentric, Western, and male discourse. Even
though there are, you know, Naomi Klein, Naomi Rasky's, there are these great figures, but
it is strange how that discourse is. I mean, considering, as you say, that, you know, it's
Asians who are going to be hit and Africans and so on, how few Asian and African voices participate
in this discourse? Well, that I have to say that's not completely fair. I mean, I mean, I mean,
to some extent, that's true. It's less true than it used to be. But for example, the IPCC
works very, very hard at inclusiveness. And I think that should at least be acknowledged.
But to some people, you know exactly why Muranus and the Latin Americans walked out of Copenhagen?
Well, I think it was over-determined, honestly. So I have another kind of statement and question.
So I don't know if other people in the room feel this as well, but I felt that there was a certain
lack of forward-looking kind of part of the element in this discussion. And I'd love to invite you
for whatever the time we have left to do that a little bit with the preface that I think,
Emith, have you talking about part of the current problem dating back to the 17th century? I want
to suggest that it might go back 10,000 years, but definitely it goes back to the patricento and
like the invention of perspective and those kind of precursors to science, to the invention of
science, which objectified nature allows it allows us to manipulate it. So there's a deep
involvement with science and industrialization together as a kind of immediate cause of climate
change in which individualism is also tied. And to kind of counterbalance that I think we're at a
moment where there's also a possible opportunity in this tragedy, and that is there's a moment of
realization that we are part of a larger collective. And I think it's apparent in the
disciplinary space where people are more and more trying to work across disciplines and in the
cultural space and in the fact that we are trying to, we are acknowledging that we are many cultures
and that we're polyphonic and that the solutions will be polyphonic. Of course there's political
forces that go against that. But so just to give you a little context, I'm an artist. I work with
scientists around this project called the Ocean Memory Project where we look at memory not as a
rear looking process but as a forward looking process and that's integral to nature or to the
ocean. And that's I'm sort of curious about you as intelligence in the room and our larger group
thinking about our ability to look forward not necessarily with hope or with a positive outlook
but just to see what is what is existent in the moment to take advantage of. I feel like
climate change is forcing us to face some of our own demons in ways that we wouldn't need to if
it weren't there and that's an amazing opportunity. So I'm just curious like if you were to now
okay you've had your rear looking analysis if for two minutes you were to look forward
in a hopeful or not a hopeful way in terms of what does this up but this moment what are the
opportunities in the present to be better, to be worse, to be I don't know but like if you were to
go forward from now. Don you wanted to say? Well does climate change force us to do something
that was the premise of the question and I'm interested in this word force and I think it
intersects with what you were saying earlier about regulation
that is under what conditions are humans for our humans forced to do something how does that
happen what what is the force that forces us and it seems to me it's it's extremely elusive
um most of us are not forced at all that seems to me the problem whatever we mean by individualism
we we includes the individual's capacity to evade forces
and and not only that to celebrate that evasion as power. I am powerful to the extent
that I am free from the influence of forces so tremendously deep question actually I mean it's
so deep that it's well he raises almost it's it's in fact but but you know one of the the things to
think about in in responding to it no doubt very much on the surface is that sometime after
Australia we we really began to think that human beings can be made better by making them over
into citizens laws and costitions that didn't go so well no a last a last and a last but didn't
go off and we might have to say it didn't work yeah and that's really you know one symptom of
how how that question is it I mean you can't understand the enlightenment and all its codes and
constitutions without seeing that aspiration as underlying it that you can make human beings better
what's bad in us can be made better by making our so going to citizens it just hasn't worked
yeah but by citizens I mean forcing us through laws and constitutions to be different which is
really what you're what you're seeking so that's once one level it which just didn't work
do we have it do we have a Singapore in the Netherlands do we have it it's painful to be in on this
conversation and to hear that question and not be able to jump forward I have to say that I really
disagree with the premise of that question in the sense that I think this whole business of whole
president made pointed out earlier is something that arises out of this whole sort of bourgeois
society which creates the problem in the first place I mean if you think of other societies
if you think of pre-modern societies human beings were always intensely aware of their precariousness
you know that didn't make them hopeless but it made them very aware that they were always in danger
that is what we want people to wake up to yes you're in danger this is what it is life is not
the smiling liberal paradise that you are from it it's actually very interesting
on the dot because sometime amongst philosophers we stopped talking about what it would be to cope
and you know we started saying what would it take for us to flourish yes no flourish human
I don't want to flourish I just want to go for long walks and listen to music and read
complaining the notion of what compels us we rise to forces it's not what compelled it but what
impels us well okay I wait I wait to complain those two notions and someone said earlier regarding
because I see this as a moral challenge and moral imperative and when you talk about morality
you are you are alluding to subjectivity the more problem is not something it evolved to a
collective action but ultimately it's a subjective experience so the person is not what compels
us which it is a practical question the question I think that that precedes that is what impels
you not us what impels you start there and then examine the the organic evolution of that question
if that makes sense I would have to conflate the notion with what compels you to what it tells you
that's all all right one response that we're gonna have well I'm afraid that what I have to say is
very simple literal and flat-flitted in relation to what I just requested to be so and it just really
to make a couple points one is there's some obvious things that are going to be different
most parts I mean let's just take the United States most parts of the United States that where the
landmass was created by filling in which includes parts of New York are not going to exist by the
end of the century there are ways of eating and ways of life it's much harder to be quite
specific about that that we know that by the end of the century are no longer going going to exist
and as we go out further it's going to you know it's going to become a little more less certain
which those things are but some we can identify now now this is the interesting psychological point
to me that much that we do under constraint or however we want to characterize this we don't think
of as doing under constraint I joyfully get on the internet every day even though if I were not on
the internet I would be unable to do my job there's a sense in which I've sort of compelled to be on
the internet people who got telephones in my parents generation saw this in some way as a
positive choice I suppose but from another point of view they were socially coerced actually to
have a telephone in order to take part in a life that made livelihood possible people to many people
who smoked of the last in the last generation didn't feel that they might have felt that taking up
cigarettes was a positive choice but the power of social conformity was incredibly strong and now
the same thing is true on the other side so one of the kind of weirdnesses here in terms of lining
up the subjectivity with the objectivity is that we often don't see the social facts that condition
and constrain and even coerce us as being independent of our preferences and choices
well just one final thing to build on that I think that the solutions are social we know how to do
it scientifically we know how what needs to be done in many ways in terms of changing things
and physical but now we're grasping and that's what part of this discussion is is how do we find
the social way to make this happen personally I think that's going to be a really hard task